\thispagestyle{empty}

Credits
-------

    Editorial Support: Elliott Hauser, Sue Blumenberg
    Cover Design: Aimee Andrion

Printing History
----------------

* 2016-Jul-05 First Complete Python 3.0 version
* 2015-Dec-20 Initial Python 3.0 rough conversion

Copyright Details
-----------------

Copyright 2009- Dr. Charles R. Severance.

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported License.
This license is available at

http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/

You can see what the author considers commercial and non-commercial
uses of this material as well as license exemptions
in the Appendix titled "Copyright Detail".

\cleardoublepage

Preface
=======

Remixing an Open Book
---------------------

It is quite natural for academics who are continuously told to "publish
or perish" to want to always create something from scratch that is their
own fresh creation. This book is an experiment in not starting from
scratch, but instead "remixing" the book titled *Think Python: How to
Think Like a Computer Scientist* written by Allen B. Downey, Jeff
Elkner, and others.

In December of 2009, I was preparing to teach *SI502 - Networked
Programming* at the University of Michigan for the fifth
semester in a row and decided it was time to write a Python textbook
that focused on exploring data instead of understanding algorithms and
abstractions. My goal in SI502 is to teach people lifelong data handling
skills using Python. Few of my students were planning to be professional
computer programmers. Instead, they planned to be librarians, managers,
lawyers, biologists, economists, etc., who happened to want to
skillfully use technology in their chosen field.

I never seemed to find the perfect data-oriented Python book for my
course, so I set out to write just such a book. Luckily at a faculty
meeting three weeks before I was about to start my new book from scratch
over the holiday break, Dr. Atul Prakash showed me the *Think Python*
book which he had used to teach his Python course that semester. It is a
well-written Computer Science text with a focus on short, direct
explanations and ease of learning.

The overall book structure has been changed to get to doing data
analysis problems as quickly as possible and have a series of running
examples and exercises about data analysis from the very beginning.

Chapters 2–10 are similar to the *Think Python* book, but there have
been major changes. Number-oriented examples and exercises have been
replaced with data-oriented exercises. Topics are presented in the order
needed to build increasingly sophisticated data analysis solutions. Some
topics like `try` and `except` are pulled forward
and presented as part of the chapter on conditionals. Functions are
given very light treatment until they are needed to handle program
complexity rather than introduced as an early lesson in abstraction.
Nearly all user-defined functions have been removed from the example
code and exercises outside of Chapter 4. The word "recursion"^[Except,
of course, for this line.] does not appear in the book at all.

In chapters 1 and 11–16, all of the material is brand new, focusing on
real-world uses and simple examples of Python for data analysis
including regular expressions for searching and parsing, automating
tasks on your computer, retrieving data across the network, scraping web
pages for data, object-oriented programming,
using web services, parsing XML and JSON data, 
creating and using databases using Structured Query Language,
and visualizing data.

The ultimate goal of all of these changes is to shift from a Computer
Science to an Informatics focus and to only include topics into a first
technology class that can be useful even if one chooses not to become a
professional programmer.

Students who find this book interesting and want to further explore
should look at Allen B. Downey's *Think Python* book. Because there is a
lot of overlap between the two books, students will quickly pick up
skills in the additional areas of technical programming and algorithmic
thinking that are covered in *Think Python*. And given that the books
have a similar writing style, they should be able to move quickly
through *Think Python* with a minimum of effort.

\index{Creative Commons License}
\index{CC-BY-SA}
\index{BY-SA}

As the copyright holder of *Think Python*, Allen has given me permission
to change the book's license on the material from his book that remains
in this book from the GNU Free Documentation License to the more recent
Creative Commons Attribution — Share Alike license. This follows a
general shift in open documentation licenses moving from the GFDL to the
CC-BY-SA (e.g., Wikipedia). Using the CC-BY-SA license maintains the
book's strong copyleft tradition while making it even more
straightforward for new authors to reuse this material as they see fit.

I feel that this book serves as an example of why open materials are so
important to the future of education, and I want to thank Allen B. Downey
and Cambridge University Press for their forward-looking decision to
make the book available under an open copyright. I hope they are pleased
with the results of my efforts and I hope that you, the reader, are
pleased with *our* collective efforts.

I would like to thank Allen B. Downey and Lauren Cowles for their help,
patience, and guidance in dealing with and resolving the copyright
issues around this book.

Charles Severance\
www.dr-chuck.com\
Ann Arbor, MI, USA\
September 9, 2013

Charles Severance is a Clinical Associate Professor at the University of
Michigan School of Information.

