Python Programming on Apple OS X
================================

In this appendix, we walk through a series of steps so you can run
Python 3 on Apple OS X.  Python 2.7 is already installed in OS X.  To
install Python 3.5 go to www.python.org/downloads/ and follow the 
instructions given there. 

Once you have Python 3 installed, you only need to learn how to edit
Python 3 files, and how to run Python 3 programs in the Terminal window. 
Because Python 2.7 is already installed as 'python', Python 3.5 will
be installed as 'python3'.  This is the command you need to use to execute
Python 3 programs, not 'python', which will still execute Pythone 2.7
programs. 

There are many approaches you can take to editing and running Python
programs, and this is just one approach we have found to be very simple.

First, you need to install a programmer text editor.  The OS X Terminal's 
Command Line Interface (CLI) offers access to two venerable text
editors: VIM and Emacs.  Either of these editors can be used if you 
already know how to use one.  You can learn more about these editors
on the internet.

Many programmers want a GUI based text editor.  You do not want to use
OS X TextEdit to edit Python programs. Programs must be in "flat-text" 
files, so you need an editor that is good at editing text files.

You also don't want to use the Apple Xcode IDE.  It is a huge overkill,
which will only add more complexity to your learning Python 3.

Our recommended editor for Macintosh is TextWrangler which can be
downloaded and installed from:

<http://www.barebones.com/products/TextWrangler/>

You should look in the preferences for TextWrangler and set it to
expand tab characters to four spaces. It will save you lots of effort
looking for indentation errors.

To create a Python program, run *TextWrangler* from your
*Applications* folder.

Let's make our first Python program be:

    print('Hello Chuck')

Except that you should change 'Chuck' to be your name. Save the file in a
folder on your Desktop named `py4inf`. It is best to keep
your folder names short and not to have any spaces in your folder or
file name. Once you have made the folder, save the file into
`Desktop`\\`py4inf`\\`prog1.py`.

Then run the *Terminal* program. The easiest way is to
press the Spotlight icon (the magnifying glass) in the upper right of
your screen, enter "terminal", and launch the application that comes up.

You start in your "home directory". You can see the present working directory by
typing the `pwd` command in the terminal window.

    67-194-80-15:~ csev$ pwd
    /Users/csev
    67-194-80-15:~ csev$

You must be in the folder that contains your Python program to run the
program. Use the `cd` command to move to a new folder and
then the `ls` command to list the files in the folder.

    67-194-80-15:~ csev$ cd Desktop
    67-194-80-15:Desktop csev$ cd py4inf
    67-194-80-15:py4inf csev$ ls
    prog1.py
    67-194-80-15:py4inf csev$

To run your program, simply type the `python3` command
followed by the name of your file at the command prompt and press enter.
The `python` command will attempt to execute you program as a Python 2.7
program. 

    67-194-80-15:py4inf csev$ python3 prog1.py
    Hello Chuck
    67-194-80-15:py4inf csev$

You can edit the file in TextWrangler, save it, and then switch back to
the command line and execute the program again by typing the file name
again at the command-line prompt.  Or use the up-arrow key to scroll back 
to the previous command.  Simply striking the return key will re-execute
the command shown at the CLI prompt. 

A few notes on using Apple OS X Terminal Command Line Interface (CLI)

Apple OS X is built on UNIX, which provides access to thousands of useful 
programs. Python is one of those programs. 

To find commands (programs) on a particular subject, at the CLI prompt 
enter `man -k subject-matter`.  This will return a listing of commands 
that address your chosen subject matter.

For the manual on a praticular command, at the CLI prompt enter
`man <command>`. 

Search the internet for "basic UNIX commands" to find documentation on the 
dozen, or so, commands that you need to take full advantage of the OS X CLI. 

Your UNIX home directory is at `/Users/your-user-name`.  If you get confused 
in the Terminal window, you can return to you home directory simply by
entering an empty `cd` command.  You can then use `ls`, `cd`, and `pwd`
commands to navigate the file system from there.

If you get totally confused in the Terminal window, you can always close it
and open a new one.  The new Termianl window should open at your home directory.

To exit the Terminal enter the `exit` command, or click the red dot in the
upper left of the terminal pane. 

You can also find further information on editing and running Python
programs at [www.pythonlearn.com](www.pythonlearn.com).
